Lab 02: Comprehensive Nmap Aggressive Scan (-A)
Objective

The objective of this assessment was to perform an in-depth reconnaissance of the target host using Nmap's Aggressive Scan (-A) option. The scan aimed to identify:

Open ports
Running services
Service versions
Host information
Operating system characteristics
Default script results
Additional security-relevant information
Scan Command
db_nmap -Pn -n -A 172.16.59.129
Command Breakdown
Option	Purpose
db_nmap	Runs Nmap inside the Metasploit Framework and stores results in its database.
-Pn	Assumes the host is online and skips ICMP host discovery.
-n	Disables DNS resolution to reduce scan time.
-A	Enables aggressive scanning, including version detection, OS detection, default NSE scripts, and traceroute.
Executive Summary

The target host is confirmed to be Metasploitable 2, an intentionally vulnerable Linux system used for security training.

The scan identified:

23 open TCP ports
Multiple outdated services
Several legacy protocols
Default configurations
Insecure cryptographic settings
Exposed administrative services

Overall, the host presents a very large attack surface, which is expected for a training environment but would pose significant risk if found on a production network.

Detailed Analysis
1. FTP Service (Port 21)

Service: vsftpd 2.3.4

Findings
Anonymous FTP login is enabled.
Control and data channels operate in plaintext.
Anonymous FTP login allowed
Security Impact

Allowing anonymous access can expose sensitive files if not carefully configured. Plaintext FTP also means credentials and transferred data can be intercepted on untrusted networks.

Risk: High

2. SSH (Port 22)

OpenSSH 4.7p1

Findings

Nmap retrieved the server's public host keys.

This confirms SSH is correctly advertising its identity, but the version is outdated and should be reviewed for compatibility with current security standards.

Risk: Medium

3. SMTP (Port 25)
Findings

Nmap enumerated SMTP capabilities, including:

STARTTLS
VRFY
PIPELINING
Security Observation

The availability of the VRFY command may allow user enumeration depending on server configuration.

The server also advertises SSLv2, an obsolete protocol that is no longer considered secure.

The certificate presented is expired.

Risk: High

4. DNS (Port 53)
ISC BIND 9.4.2
Findings

The server disclosed its version information.

Security Observation

Version disclosure can assist an attacker in identifying publicly documented vulnerabilities associated with that release.

Risk: Medium

5. Web Server (Port 80)

Apache 2.2.8

Findings

The HTTP title reveals:

Metasploitable2 - Linux
Security Observation

The page title and server banner provide fingerprinting information that helps identify the underlying platform. Reducing unnecessary information disclosure is a common hardening practice.

Risk: Medium

6. RPC/NFS Services

The scan identified several RPC services, including:

rpcbind
mountd
nlockmgr
status
NFS
Security Observation

RPC and NFS services should only be exposed where operationally necessary. Exported shares and access controls should be reviewed.

Risk: Medium

7. SMB (Ports 139 and 445)
Samba 3.0.20
Findings

The SMB version is disclosed.

Security Observation

Older Samba versions have had multiple publicly documented vulnerabilities over time. Administrators should ensure supported versions and appropriate authentication controls are in place.

Risk: High

8. Legacy Remote Administration Services

Detected services include:

rexecd
rlogin
rsh
Security Observation

These protocols are considered legacy and transmit data insecurely. Modern environments typically replace them with SSH.

Risk: High

9. MySQL (3306)

Nmap successfully retrieved server metadata, including:

Protocol version
Authentication capabilities
Server version
Security Observation

Database services should generally be restricted to trusted hosts and networks. Exposure increases the importance of strong authentication and network controls.

Risk: High

10. PostgreSQL (5432)

The scan detected:

PostgreSQL 8.3.x
An expired SSL certificate
Security Observation

Expired certificates can indicate poor maintenance practices and should be renewed in production environments.

Risk: Medium

11. VNC (5900)

Nmap identified:

Protocol 3.3
Security Observation

Older VNC protocol versions provide limited security features and should be protected with strong authentication and network restrictions.

Risk: Medium

12. IRC Server
UnrealIRCd
Findings

Nmap collected server metadata, including:

Server name
Version
Uptime
User count
Security Observation

Publicly exposed version information can aid fingerprinting and vulnerability research.

Risk: Medium

Information Disclosure Findings

The scan revealed several types of information disclosure:

Service versions
Hostname
Workgroup name
SSL certificate details
Public SSH keys
SMTP capabilities
MySQL server metadata
IRC server information

While not vulnerabilities on their own, such disclosures can assist attackers during reconnaissance.

Overall Risk Assessment
Category	Risk
Attack Surface	High
Legacy Protocols	High
Outdated Software	High
Information Disclosure	Medium
Encryption Configuration	High
Network Exposure	High
Defensive Recommendations

To improve the security posture of a comparable production system:

Disable unnecessary services and legacy protocols (e.g., Telnet, RSH, Rlogin).
Replace FTP with secure alternatives such as SFTP or FTPS where appropriate.
Upgrade unsupported or outdated software versions.
Remove anonymous access unless there is a documented business need.
Disable obsolete cryptographic protocols such as SSLv2.
Renew expired TLS certificates.
Limit exposure of administrative and database services through firewalls and network segmentation.
Minimize service banner and version disclosure where feasible.
Conduct regular vulnerability assessments and patch management.
Skills Demonstrated

This lab demonstrates practical skills in:

Network reconnaissance
Service and version enumeration
Attack surface analysis
Use of Nmap NSE scripts
Identification of insecure configurations
Risk assessment
Security documentation
Defensive security recommendations
Portfolio Note

This is an excellent repository entry because it goes beyond simply listing open ports. It shows that you can interpret scan results, identify security implications, and provide actionable defensive recommendations—skills that are valuable in roles such as SOC Analyst, Vulnerability Analyst, and Penetration Tester.
