Lab 03: Operating System Detection with Nmap (-O)
Objective

The purpose of this lab is to identify the operating system running on the target host using Nmap's OS fingerprinting capabilities. Accurate OS identification helps security professionals understand the target environment, prioritize relevant vulnerabilities, and plan defensive or assessment activities.

Scan Command
db_nmap -Pn -n -O 172.16.59.129
Command Breakdown
Option	Description
db_nmap	Runs Nmap through the Metasploit Framework and stores results in its database.
-Pn	Skips host discovery and assumes the target is online.
-n	Disables DNS resolution to speed up the scan.
-O	Enables operating system detection through TCP/IP fingerprinting.
Executive Summary

The scan successfully identified the target as a Linux-based system and estimated that it is running a Linux 2.6.x kernel. The host is one network hop away and appears to be running inside a VMware virtual environment.

Unlike service-version scans, the -O option focuses on identifying the host operating system rather than the versions of applications listening on open ports.

Host Information
Property	Result
Target IP	172.16.59.129
Host Status	Up
Latency	0.00096 seconds
Network Distance	1 hop
MAC Vendor	VMware
Device Type	General Purpose Computer
Operating System Detection
Operating System Family
Linux
Kernel Version
Linux 2.6.X
Best Match
Linux 2.6.9 – 2.6.33
CPE Identifier
cpe:/o:linux:linux_kernel:2.6
Interpretation

Nmap compares the target's responses to a database of known TCP/IP fingerprints. Based on characteristics such as TCP sequence numbers, window sizes, and protocol behavior, it estimates that the system is running a Linux 2.6 kernel.

Because this is Metasploitable 2, the result aligns with expectations.

Open Ports Discovered

The scan identified 23 open TCP ports, including:

Port	Service	Security Consideration
21	FTP	File transfer service; review authentication and encryption.
22	SSH	Secure remote administration; verify current configuration and supported ciphers.
23	Telnet	Legacy plaintext protocol; avoid in production environments.
25	SMTP	Mail service; review relay configuration and authentication.
53	DNS	Domain Name System; review recursion and zone transfer settings.
80	HTTP	Web server; assess for outdated software and application issues.
139 / 445	SMB	File sharing; verify authentication and share permissions.
3306	MySQL	Database service; restrict network exposure and enforce strong authentication.
5432	PostgreSQL	Database service; review access controls.
5900	VNC	Remote desktop service; secure with strong authentication and network restrictions.
6667	IRC	Messaging service; verify necessity and configuration.
8180	HTTP (unknown)	Investigate the application listening on this port.
Security Analysis
1. Linux 2.6 Kernel

The identified kernel belongs to an older Linux generation. In a production environment, such an operating system would warrant review to ensure it is still supported and receiving security updates.

Observation: Older operating systems may no longer receive vendor security patches and should be evaluated as part of lifecycle management.

2. VMware Environment

The MAC address indicates the host is running on VMware virtual hardware.

Observation: This is consistent with a virtual laboratory setup and is commonly used for security testing and training.

3. Broad Attack Surface

The presence of 23 open TCP ports indicates numerous exposed network services.

Observation: In a production environment, each exposed service should have a defined business purpose, be properly configured, and be regularly patched.

4. Legacy Services

Several detected services (such as Telnet and legacy remote administration protocols) are considered outdated.

Observation: Where possible, modern, encrypted alternatives should be used, and unnecessary legacy services should be disabled.

What the -O Scan Does Well

The operating system detection scan provides valuable information for:

Asset identification
Vulnerability prioritization
Environment validation
Security inventory
Penetration testing planning

It allows defenders and assessors to understand the likely operating system before conducting deeper analysis.

Limitations

Operating system detection is based on fingerprint matching and therefore provides an estimate rather than an absolute guarantee. Accuracy can be affected by:

Firewalls
Packet filtering
Network address translation (NAT)
Custom TCP/IP stack implementations
Limited access to fingerprinting responses

Where practical, OS detection results should be corroborated with other evidence, such as authenticated asset inventories or configuration management data.

Recommendations

Based on the scan results, recommended defensive actions include:

Maintain an up-to-date inventory of operating systems and network services.
Ensure supported operating system versions are deployed and patched.
Reduce the attack surface by disabling unnecessary services.
Replace legacy protocols (for example, Telnet) with secure alternatives such as SSH.
Restrict administrative and database services using firewalls and network segmentation.
Perform periodic OS and service discovery scans to detect unauthorized or unexpected changes.
Skills Demonstrated

This lab demonstrates practical skills in:

Network reconnaissance
Operating system fingerprinting
Host identification
TCP/IP fingerprint analysis
Attack surface assessment
Security documentation
Risk assessment
Use of Nmap within the Metasploit Framework
Conclusion

The scan successfully identified the target as a Linux 2.6.x system running in a VMware virtual environment with a significant number of exposed services. While this configuration is expected for the intentionally vulnerable Metasploitable 2 training platform, the same findings on a production host would warrant a detailed review of operating system support status, exposed services, and overall hardening measures. This lab illustrates how OS detection complements service enumeration by providing context that helps guide subsequent security assessment activities.
