Analysis of Nmap Service Enumeration Scan
Executive Summary

An Nmap version detection scan (-sV) was conducted against the target host 172.16.59.129 from a Kali Linux system using the Metasploit db_nmap command.

The objective of the scan was to identify:

Active services
Open TCP ports
Service versions
Potential attack surface

The target appears to be Metasploitable 2, an intentionally vulnerable Linux virtual machine designed for penetration testing practice.

Scan Information
Item	Value
Scanner	Nmap 7.99
Scan Type	Service Version Detection
Command	db_nmap -Pn -n -sV 172.16.59.129
Host Status	Up
Latency	0.0017 seconds
Closed Ports	977
Open Ports	23
Command Analysis
db_nmap -Pn -n -sV 172.16.59.129
Meaning of the Parameters
Option	Description
db_nmap	Executes Nmap through the Metasploit Framework and stores scan results in the Metasploit database.
-Pn	Skips host discovery and assumes the target is online. Useful when ICMP responses are filtered.
-n	Disables DNS resolution to speed up scanning.
-sV	Attempts to determine the version of services listening on open ports.
Host Information

Nmap identified:

Operating System Family: Linux / Unix
Hostname:
metasploitable.localdomain

MAC Vendor:

VMware

This indicates the target is running inside a VMware virtual environment.

Service Enumeration Analysis
FTP (21)
vsftpd 2.3.4
Observation

This is one of the most well-known vulnerable FTP servers.

Historically, compromised versions of vsftpd 2.3.4 have been associated with a backdoor that allows unauthorized shell access under specific circumstances. The version alone does not prove the backdoor is present, but it warrants investigation in a controlled lab.

Risk Level: High

SSH (22)
OpenSSH 4.7p1
Observation

SSH provides encrypted remote administration.

The detected version is considerably outdated by modern standards. Older SSH implementations may lack support for newer cryptographic algorithms and may contain vulnerabilities that have since been addressed.

Risk Level: Medium

Telnet (23)
Linux telnetd
Observation

Telnet transmits all communication, including usernames and passwords, in plaintext.

Its presence represents a significant security concern on production systems because credentials can be intercepted on the network.

Risk Level: High

SMTP (25)
Postfix
Observation

Mail services should be reviewed for:

Open relay configuration
User enumeration
Misconfigurations
Information disclosure

Risk Level: Medium

DNS (53)
ISC BIND 9.4.2
Observation

Older versions of BIND have been affected by multiple security issues over the years.

A DNS service should also be assessed for:

Zone transfers
Cache poisoning protections
Recursion settings

Risk Level: Medium

HTTP (80)
Apache HTTP Server 2.2.8
Observation

Apache 2.2.8 is an older release.

Potential assessment areas include:

Default pages
Directory listing
Outdated modules
Web application vulnerabilities
HTTP methods

Risk Level: Medium to High

Samba (139, 445)
Samba 3.x–4.x
Observation

SMB is commonly targeted during internal network assessments.

Typical review areas include:

Anonymous access
Shared folders
Authentication configuration
SMB version support

Risk Level: High

Remote Shell Services (512–514)

Detected:

rexecd
rlogin
rsh
Observation

These legacy remote administration protocols transmit data insecurely and are generally considered obsolete.

Their presence significantly increases the exposed attack surface.

Risk Level: High

Java RMI (1099)
GNU Classpath RMI Registry
Observation

Java RMI services can expose remote objects.

Misconfigured RMI services may permit unauthorized interactions or remote code execution in vulnerable environments.

Risk Level: Medium

Root Bind Shell (1524)
Metasploitable Root Shell
Observation

This service is intentionally included in Metasploitable 2 as part of its training environment.

On a real production system, an exposed root shell would represent a critical security incident.

Risk Level: Critical

NFS (2049)
NFS v2–4
Observation

Network File System services should be checked for:

Exported shares
Authentication controls
Excessive permissions

Risk Level: Medium

FTP (2121)
ProFTPD 1.3.1
Observation

A second FTP service is running.

Multiple FTP services increase the attack surface and should be evaluated independently.

Risk Level: Medium

MySQL (3306)
MySQL 5.0.51a
Observation

Database services should not normally be exposed unless required.

Assessment areas include:

Weak credentials
Default accounts
Network access restrictions
Version-specific vulnerabilities

Risk Level: High

PostgreSQL (5432)
PostgreSQL 8.3.x
Observation

An older PostgreSQL release is exposed.

Review should include:

Authentication configuration
Default credentials
Network exposure

Risk Level: Medium

VNC (5900)
Protocol 3.3
Observation

Older VNC implementations often rely on weaker authentication mechanisms and may lack encryption by default.

Risk Level: Medium

UnrealIRCd (6667)
Observation

This service is intentionally included in Metasploitable for training.

Historically, compromised distributions of UnrealIRCd have been associated with remote code execution through a backdoor.

Risk Level: High

Apache JServ (8009)
AJP13
Observation

AJP connectors should not normally be exposed to untrusted networks.

Misconfigurations have historically enabled attacks such as Ghostcat (on affected configurations).

Risk Level: Medium

Apache Tomcat (8180)
Apache Tomcat
Observation

Tomcat commonly exposes:

Administrative interfaces
Sample applications
Deployment services

These should be carefully secured in production.

Risk Level: Medium

Overall Assessment

The scan identified 23 open TCP services, many of which are legacy or intentionally vulnerable components. This creates a broad attack surface suitable for penetration testing exercises but would represent significant risk in a production environment.

Key Observations
Numerous outdated service versions.
Multiple legacy remote access protocols (Telnet, RSH, Rlogin).
Several network-facing database services.
Multiple file-sharing and remote administration services.
A large number of services that would require hardening or removal in a production environment.
Recommendations

From a defensive standpoint, the following actions would reduce risk:

Disable unnecessary network services.
Replace insecure protocols (such as Telnet) with secure alternatives like SSH.
Restrict administrative services to trusted networks.
Apply vendor-supported software updates and security patches.
Implement host-based and network firewalls to limit exposure.
Regularly perform vulnerability assessments and configuration reviews.
Remove default credentials and unnecessary applications.
Monitor exposed services through continuous security logging and alerting.
Skills Demonstrated

This lab demonstrates practical skills in:

Network reconnaissance
Service enumeration
Version detection
Attack surface identification
Security documentation
Risk assessment
Defensive security analysis
Use of Nmap within the Metasploit Framework

This level of documentation is the kind of content that helps a GitHub repository stand out because it explains not just what the scan found, but also why the findings matter and how they would be approached from a defender's perspective.
